hey this is dr ben white host of the
rational wellness podcast
i talk to the leading health and
nutrition experts and researchers in the
field to bring you the latest in
cutting-edge health information
subscribe to the rational wellness
podcast for weekly updates and to learn
more check out my website
doctorwhites.com
thanks for joining me and let's jump
into the podcast hello rational wellness
podcasters today our topic is cancer as
a metabolic disease with dr thomas c
free
today we will be talking about cancer
what causes cancer and what to do about
it
while there have been some remarkable
advancements in cancer care
including some of the new targeted drugs
that are much less toxic than
traditional chemotherapy and
immunotherapy
as an example look at former president
jimmy carter who in 2015 was diagnosed
with melanoma that it spread to his
liver and his brain
he was treated with surgery for the
lesions on his liver radiation to his
brain and immunotherapy and he's still
alive and thriving six years later
on the other hand most patients with
metastatic cancer do not live very long
and progress on this front has been very
slow
our current cancer treatment protocol of
surgery chemotherapy and radiation
has not been very effective for
metastatic cancer
which is cancer that has spread from the
original tumor
we spend over 150 billion dollars each
year treating cancer yet a patient with
cancer is as likely to die of it today
with a few exceptions as one was 50
years ago
according to our guest today dr thomas
seyfried we need to rethink our concept
about how cancer forms and how to treat
it
dr thomas c freed has a phd in genetics
in biochemistry
and he's a professor of biology at
boston college he serves on several
editorial boards including those for
nutrition and metabolism
neurochemical research the journal of
lipid research frontiers in ecology and
asn neuro where he's a senior editor
he has
published over 200 peer-reviewed
publications and he's the author of the
book
cancer as a metabolic disease
on the origin management and prevention
of cancer dr seyfried thank you so much
for joining me today
well thank you very much ben it's uh
it's a pleasure for me to be here
so um perhaps you could start by
describing what is the most commonly
accepted theory of
cancer today which is the genetic theory
of cancer
yeah um well that that's uh that's quite
true um
it's it's uh stated on the
website for the national cancer
institute that cancer is a genetic
disease
um and you know reading all the
textbooks of biology biochemistry and
cell biology in those sections of the
of the book on
books on cancer it's always cancer is a
genetic disease
caused specifically
by nuclear somatic mutations
that give these cancer cells
a
growth advantage over normal cells
and this is pretty much
the ideology
that has indoctrinated the
generations of physicians and scientists
to develop drugs and therapy some of
which you've mentioned in your
introduction
that uh justify
uh the continued and failed strategy by
which cancer is being uh managed today
um
can you then explain what is the
metabolic theory of cancer which is the
theory that you have advanced
based on the work of otto warburg to
start with
yeah well um you know otto warburg uh
defined cancer as a metabolic problem
back in the 1920s 30s and 40s
um
he was
uh he showed and was convinced that all
cancer
was derived from damage to the energy
genera the primary energy generating uh
organelle in the cell which is the
mitochondrion
all all other aspects of the disease are
downstream effects
of this damage to the ability of the
cell
to generate energy through
respiration oxidative phosphorylation
which is the use of oxygen to generate
energy
um
for those people don't understand what
you're saying is is what we consider uh
aerobic exercise which is when you run
and you use oxygen yes
as compared to say sprinting which is
glycolytic and requires uh glucose for
energy yeah well that's absolutely true
and and the muscles can
can do um anaerobic
uh fermentation they build up lactic
acid but this is only for a short period
of time and then there you you can uh
once you start breathing again the
muscles will will respire the the issue
here is the cancer cells are locked in
permanently to this uh fermentation
metabolism the muscles can do it
periodically but they're not locked into
it they their mitochondria are healthy
and they can use
uh respiration to generate uh the energy
the tumor cell is locked into a constant
fermentation mechanism and that's due to
the the damage uh and the insufficiency
of the mitochondria in the cancer cell
and as a result of that they produce
these reactive oxygen species which are
carcinogenic and mutagenic
and they are the the the defect in
respiration is ultimately responsible
for the somatic mutations that you see
in cancer cells so
cancer cells yes have a lot of mutations
broken chromosomes and all these kinds
of things that that uh
are are thought
to be involved but they're actually
downstream effects they're not the cause
they're the effect
so that's the main the main difference
is the mitochondrial metabolic theory
places the origin
of the disease
in the energy generating mitochondria
where the somatic mutation theory places
the origin of the disease in the nucleus
associated with various kinds of
mutations
it's interesting it would seem to be
to rely exclusively on aerobic
respiration
would seem to be a poor strategy for
cancer cells to adopt
yeah well they they they're uh uh
falling back the cancer cells see
on the origin of life
uh
on our planet
uh was associated with um uh an
anaerobic environment uh there was very
little if any oxygen 2.5 billion years
ago and all the organisms that existed
at that time were fermenting they were
fermenters so these ancient pathways of
fermentation were the original
energy generating uh pathways for these
cells there was no oxygen so they had to
ferment and these cells would ferment
grow like crazy proliferate like crazy
and die as soon as fermentable fuels
were depleted from their environment
so uh the cancer cell
today in someone's body is using these
same ancient fermentation pathways they
grow they grow without oxygen it's well
known cancer cells can grow without
oxygen and they can grow in cyanide
cyanide is a poison for oxidative
phosphorylation yet cancer cells grow
fine in cyanide so basically these cells
are simply falling back on ancient
pathways involving fermentation and they
will grow
and and metastasize as long as there are
fermentable fuels in the environment
that drive their growth
when the fermentable fuels are targeted
like we're doing then these cells die
they cannot live without glucose and
glutamine the two fermentable fuels that
these cancer cells use so this is a very
simple strategy for the management of
the majority of cancers take away
glucose and glutamine now does it depend
on the cancer cell which type of cancer
no we haven't found any difference
they're all the same
so um
lung is the same as brain is the same as
breast is the same as bladder is the
same as colon they're all the same they
all need to ferment so the common
metabolic problem in cancer
is a dependency on fermentation for
growth and survival and the two fuels
that are driving the fermentation are
glucose
the sugar glucose and the amino acid
glutamine which is an abundant amino
acid in the body
now i'm sure you know other cancer
researchers have challenged you on this
and i i did a little research
uh and and found a few articles i found
one called the warburg and crabtree
effects
on the origin of cancer cell energy
metabolism uh by rodrigo diaz ruiz and
others and uh he claims that um
that there are certain types of cancer
cell lines that
possess uh functional mitochondria and
can obtain their atp from oxidative
phosphorylation and he mentioned
gliomas hepatomas and breast cancer
yeah well they're wrong
and i'll tell you why
first of all uh
they they appear to have normal
mitochondria because the atp is being
produced in the mitochondria
and
we know now and this was the missing
link in warburg's central theory that
glutamine the amino acid can generate
atp in the mitochondria through a
fermentation mechanism at the succinate
coe ligase step called mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorylation
we also know we published a recent paper
showing that cells in culture will take
up oxygen
giving misinformation that these cells
are using oxygen to generate energy
they're not
they're using oxygen to generate
reactive oxygen species which is causing
the damage in the nucleus so so we've
done the intensive investigation on this
and the field is misled by uh oxygen
consumption in cells growing in culture
but yet we went through every major
cancer
in tissue human tissues every major
cancer in human tissues has
mitochondrial defects number structure
and function they are not going to be
able to use oxygen they can't use oxygen
if the very structure of the organelle
is damaged but you grow the cells in
culture and everybody says oh look
they're using oxygen and they're making
atp from the mitochondria therefore
warburg is wrong no no no no they're
making atp through a fermentation
mechanism involving glutamine take
glutamine away and you see how fast
those tumor cells will die
so uh these guys unfortunately the
fields
cannot
if they accept what i say that means
warburg was ultimately correct and if
orberg was ultimately correct the gene
theory makes no sense
and
so you realize we're dealing with a lot
of big issues here but i i assure you we
have done extensive work myself and uh
christo shinopoulos from the assembled
weiss university in budapest uh we have
gone through and we have looked at all
these another issue here is that they're
selling these uh seahorse machines
uh to measure oxygen consumption in
cancer cells by the by the hundreds and
hundreds of these machines and it's
providing misinformation we we we talked
to the scientists who developed the
machines at agilent and they knew
exactly what we were saying but they
could not accept it only because they
won't be selling the machines anymore so
so
so there's a lot of issues here that you
have to recognize no the cancer cells
cannot use oxidative phosphorylation
cancer cells cannot burn fatty acids or
ketone bodies for energy because you
need a good mitochondria the cancer cell
is locked into a fermentation mechanism
involving glucose and glutamine if you
take away glucose and glutamine the
cancer cells will die especially if you
transition the whole body over to
therapeutic ketosis because ketones are
used to support our normal cell energy
metabolism but not the cancer cell very
simple way to get rid of cancer as a
matter of fact our recent paper that was
just published shows a young man with a
glioblastoma
who went on a metabolic therapy but also
acquired a mutation that targeted the
two fermentation metabolism pathways so
his diet together with the chance
acquisition of what we call a
therapeutic mutation is keeping him
alive now seven years uh out with the
glioblastoma so this is all based on the
mitochondrial metabolic theory of cancer
that completely contradicts most of the
stuff from the gene theory it's very
interesting now you know we're going to
get to treatment in a few minutes but
another piece of evidence that seems to
lend
credence to this idea that different
cancer cells function differently is you
know i i looked at some of the studies
on the ketogenic diet for cancer and it
appears as though different forms of
cancer have a much different response
so for example glioblastoma seems to
have the greatest response
whereas other
forms of brain cancer and prostate
cancer and some other forms of cancer
don't respond as well and so that lends
some evidence to this idea that
different types of cancer are work
differently
well that would certainly appear that on
the surface but that's not true
here's the situation the ketogenic diet
will target the glycolytic pathway
thereby reducing to some extent the
availability to use glucose to generate
but it does very little against the
glutamine so many of these cancers that
look like they're resistant to the
ketogenic diet are actually are actually
sucking down the gluco the glutamine the
other amino acids no cancer that we have
ever found can survive without
simultaneously targeting glucose and
glutamine so you can't just target one
fuel without the other you have to
target both fuels together because this
these cancer cells are dependent on
fermentation
and that fermentation comes from both
glucose and glutamine so some cancer
cells
the metastatic cells are derived from
macrophages most metastatic cancers are
a fusion hybridization event between
stem cells and an immune cell the most
powerful immune cell in our body called
the macrophage and we know from the
biology of the macrophage that they use
glutamine as a major fuel and they have
the natural capacity to spread through
the body suppress the immune system very
powerful cell but we've shown that
without glucose and glutamine we can
kill these cells just as well so there's
different biologies of the different
cancer cells that's true some respond
more to the ketogenic diet than others
but no no tumor cell can survive in the
absence of both glucose and glutamine
especially when ketones are used to
support the viability of normal cells
it's interesting selecting this one
particular amino acid glutamine as as
the name
driver because all the amino acids can
be turned into sugar and uh i've i've
listened to other lectures who targeted
methionine or targeted leucine and often
this is used to support a vegan diet as
the answer for cancer
yeah well you know here's the situation
with glutamine glutamine has two
nitrogen groups okay and it and it
doesn't require any uh energy on the
part of the cell to get uh to get energy
from it's called the glutaminolysis
pathway so the amide nitrogen the first
nitrogen is used uh for the synthesis of
dna and rna
uh uh nucleic acids and then the second
nitrogen is used for the for protein
synthesis you've got to have protein to
grow you need proteins nucleic acids
fatty acids and all these kinds of
things so the the glucose carbons are
good for synthesis of fatty acids and
number of metabolites for growth the
glutamine the glutamine nitrogen support
this and also provide the atp the energy
to drive to drive the cell line or to
drive the tumor or whatever the tumor
happens to be
and we know that as i said metastatic
cancer lung cancer breast cancer colon
cancer they're all metastatic those
cells are dependent on glutamine and
glucose for their growth so regardless
of what can they're all the same as i
it's it's a hard thing for people
who have been indoctrinated by the gene
theory thinking that all these different
cancers have many different diseases
it's a very complex disease you hear all
these terms it is if you view it as a
genetic disease but when you view it as
a mitochondrial metabolic disease it
can't grow without glucose and glutamine
so you target glucose and glutamine
simultaneously you'll kill the majority
of cancer cells and manage to manage the
disease in the majority of people it's
not that complicated once you understand
the biology of the situation you
understand the different types of of
cells that you are present in the in the
in the cancer you know that they throw
out lactic acid from glutamine
metabolism therefore acidifying the
micro environment facilitating
facilitating the spread of the disease
radiation and chemo will often often
encourage
stimulate this kind of stuff so when you
opened your introduction by saying we
haven't made many advances mainly
because this the treatments we're using
today actually increase the availability
of glucose and glutamine in the
environment contributing to rapid growth
and metastasis not surprising at all
[Music]
um you know um god there's so many
directions i want to go right now but um
glutamine um is also essential for cells
it's even used by some integrated
physicians to help uh some of the side
effects of of chemotherapy and um you
know if you take glutamine away from all
your cells your body will die also yes
well this is why you use the press pulse
strategy so this is what we published
and this is the framework by which all
cancers will be managed effectively
first you bring the patient into
therapeutic ketosis reducing the
availability of glucose as a metabolite
for growth
elevating ketone bodies would serve as
the alternative fuel
for normal cells because the cancer
cells can't use the ketones but the
normal cells can once the patient is in
therapeutic ketosis we pulse we pulse
glutamine targeting we don't as you said
if you put too much pressure on
glutamine you're going to harm the
immune system the gut you're going to
harm all these all these different
processes so the idea is with a pulse of
a glutamine targeting drug like deoxynor
leucine you can reduce by 50 the total
tumor population and they will not be
able to spring back you pull pull back
the glutamine targeting allow the immune
system to recover come in pick up the
dead cancer cells and let the system
recover somewhat and pulse again
reducing down again gradually gradually
reducing down the tumor cells while
maintaining the health and vitality of
the rest of the body so this is a a
ideal non-toxic strategy for the gradual
elimination of of cancer cells but also
being completely aware as you've said of
the value of glutamine to the normal
metabolism of our body so we have to we
have to do this very carefully and it's
it's based on dosage timing and
scheduling you can press down glucose
because it's a non-essential fuel but
you've got to pulse the glutamine
because it is an essential metabolite so
you put the two together and you can
manage this disease quite effectively
it seems as though
the conventional
um cancer world is uh the treatment
world is
somewhat embracing your theory because i
talked to a number of patients who were
told to fast for a few days before they
went in for their chemo and a day or two
afterwards or their radiation
um so
i i think there's some acknowledgment
that reducing the glucose fuel for the
cancer is beneficial however they're
pairing it with traditional treatments
yeah i think you know this is uh we call
this the hybrid
the system and eventually it it'll move
into a pure metabolic strain because
it's too much of a shock
to the entire cancer industry the
academic cancer industry to say that
most of what we're doing
it makes no sense
um so we have to do some hybrid thing at
the beginning and i'm working with a
group in in istanbul turkey where we
have really good results using very low
doses of chemo together with
a variety of metabolic uh targeting uh
approaches but you know it's like any
kind of a transition you go you go from
from uh pure sales to a steamship with
sales eventually to a steamship
completely or
and now you have a transition period
going from one from one stage to the
next um but in the case of that group in
turkey you're you're doing studies
clinical trials using your approach
right now yeah well i wouldn't call them
clinical trials i would call them
individual case case studies uh they're
you know i think uh my colleague uh met
igaseki used 40 40 advanced lung cancer
patients
um and was able to show results that
surpassed
exceeded uh survivability of any known
any current
chemo immune therapy chemotherapy for
managing lung cancer
you know i think it can be the system
can be improved significantly um
yeah i know it's too much of a radical
change but you know on the other hand
we're dealing with the lives of people
here
and you know and the field says well we
have to move into this metabolic therapy
gradually because it might disrupt uh
too too radically uh what we're
currently doing but if you're the guy
with the glioblastoma or the metastatic
lung cancer
you're going to say well i guess i have
to die just so this field can adapt to
what we're doing and this is absurd i
mean we have the potential right now to
keep these people alive five six times
longer than the conventional medication
but we can't because it's going to be
too radical for the field to adjust
so i'm sorry to say to the cancer
patients that might be listening uh i'm
sure you might get your ire up because
we have to sacrifice you you poor people
because it's too radical too much of a
radical shift for the field to adjust
metabolic memory what is the purpose of
radiation in chemo it's to kill cancer
cells
cancer cells can't live without glucose
and glutamine you just pull the plug on
the glucose and glutamine you're going
to get the same result they're going to
die without harming the body
i've really been enjoying this
discussion but i'd like to take a minute
to tell you about a new product that i'm
very excited about
i'd like to tell you about a new
wearable
called the apollo
and this is a device that can be worn on
the wrist or the ankle and it uses
vibrations to stimulate your
parasympathetic nervous system and this
device has amazing benefits in terms of
getting you out of that stressed out
sympathetic nervous system and
stimulating the parasympathetic nervous
system it's has a number of different
functions especially helping you to
relax to focus to concentrate to get
into a deeper meditative state
even to help you sleep and there's even
a mode to help you wake up and this all
occurs through
the
scientific use of subtle vibrations
for those of you who might be interested
in getting the apollo for yourself to
help you
reset your nervous system
go to
apollonuro.com and use the um affiliate
code white stent that's my last name
w-e-i-t-z-10
and now back to the discussion given how
dangerous deadly and and difficult
treating cancer is given you know what a
burden it is given you know
it doesn't make sense i i think the
traditional thinking is look we need to
use an all
hands-on-board approach we'll we'll use
you know a ketogenic diet but we'll use
the chemo and the radiation and the
surgery too we you know we've got to use
everything why just put those aside when
we can hit it from
all ends at the same time yeah but i can
we can do the same thing by just pulling
the plug on the glucose and glutamine
and that doesn't create create the
adverse effects in your body listen you
take a normal person and you expose them
to high doses of poison and then you
irradiate them how healthy is that i
mean this is the only disease where i
know where you're poisoning and
irradiating people to make them healthy
it makes absolutely no sense
why are you subjecting people to all
this toxicity when you don't have to do
it that's the that's the thing and the
the the ideology says because it's been
so indoctrinated into the medical
establishment we must use chemo and
radiation
you know and i'm saying no you don't you
don't have to use that because i can
achieve the same results and the same
and then they say well where are the
clinical trials to support what you're
saying who's going to pay who's going to
pay for the damn clinical trial the
radiation companies the the
pharmaceutical companies pushing these
toxic drugs who's going to pay for the
clinical trial ih
yeah nih
oh give me a break they're talking about
the pharmaceutical companies you kidding
me and they're also in the academic
industry do you have any research grants
are out there on on sequencing gene
mutations in cancer i mean it's a
complete waste of time
times you know not not prolonged
uh establishments that have shown clear
failure like you said in the
introduction we have 16 over 1600 people
a day in this country dying from cancer
over 600 000 a year dying from cancer
there's you mean there's no there's no
urgency in this
we're running and jumping and painting
pink ribbons on things it's all
all you have to do is pull the plug on
the glucose and the glutamine people say
you must be crazy why don't you look at
our new paper on pablo kelly and you'll
see the power
and the elegance of what we're talking
about here it works and it works well
the problem is is that
so many can't believe it oh he's wrong
he must be wrong
i'm my the stuff that we're doing is
based on decades and decades of
peer-reviewed scientific publications in
the literature that have not been
adapted for uh use in the clinical
practice so it makes perfect sense it
works it's going to work and it will
eventually replace all of this crazy
stuff with radiation and chemo somehow
you got to get a clinical trial going
you got to hook up with some billionaire
who's got a relative
yeah well i mean we're publishing case
report after case report illustrating
so so the argument for us they say oh
well that's only an n of one you know we
can't be sure even though the n of one
is based on hard scientific evidence
it's an n of one
so i i say well listen if we took a
thousand guys in a in helicopters and
threw them out uh they'd hit the ground
real fast we put a parachute on one guy
and he doesn't die n of one how many
more times you have to put the parachute
on the guy you know
you want to know i mean so this is a
false argument against what we're doing
anybody with a few functional brain
cells that understands the science
behind what i'm saying will immediately
say holy crap we can manage this disease
very effectively without the toxicity or
the expense that we're currently uh uh
dealing with now
i mean you're going to share this
information with your people with
whatever whoever listens to your program
and they're going to say wow you know
wow why is all this happening and then
they'll go down to the oncology oh
there's no evidence to support what he's
saying ask the guy if he understands who
warburg was ask him if he understands
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation ask him if he
understands glycolysis and
glutamineolysis and if he doesn't that's
not the guy you want to talk to to
manage your disease right but as you
just mentioned you know his ultimate
response is
where are the randomized clinical trials
on humans you know
sure that's a that's a false excuse what
are we going to do take people you know
what you're getting ketogenic diets and
you're not getting radiation and chemo i
mean you need a double blind crossover
it's immoral to do that so the
pharmaceutical industry has locked in
double-blind crossovers to to eliminate
anything except toxic drugs
so the whole system needs to be uh
changed i mean this is a
is very important what i'm saying and it
requires it requires the uh the emphasis
of the cancer patients themselves not
the people running the the operations
not the guys in the pharmaceutical
academic industry they're the last
people on the planet to want to do this
but the people who are dying from the
disease the sufferers the ones that are
being poisoned and radiated
why don't you go to the um the
manufacturer of metformin and tell him
how you know metformin you know could be
a huge
boom for you know cancer treatment
well metformin is is a a minor player
right he's a minor player you're not
going to cure cancer taking that from
that what if you did a ketogenic diet
and metformin and glutamine antagonists
you know yeah i tried we tried that
metformin
uh works in a strange way um and uh we
we were pushing uh keto restricted
ketogenic diets with metformin causing
lactic acid toxicity in the animals so
uh i mean it's and i have cancer
patients that have tried metformin with
keto and it's not as effective you gotta
you gotta target the glucose and
glutamine simultaneously and you know
metformin might do a little bit of that
but it's not as powerful as what we
already know what we can do i'm not
saying don't take metformin i'm just
saying it's not going to be uh the
factor that's going to allow you or the
cancer patient to live much longer in a
healthier state so but i'm not arguing
that we don't use metformin at all
i'm just saying it's a minor minor
player in the eventual management of the
disease a very minor player but it
doesn't harm you and it's probably uh
could have some minor effect in
improvement so i'm not i'm not you know
we've looked at so many different things
already so why waste my time on these
other things when we can go right for
the juggler of this of this disease and
knock it out
and that's the issue right i got it but
i'm just suggesting if the uh
you might get the uh company that makes
matt foreman who want to fund his study
if it could be realized
you know ben we've published so many
papers
uh identifying uh in no uncertain terms
exactly what's going on and the closest
we have in the most uh recent metabolic
information
and sometimes it's like talking to a
plug socket you know they just don't
understand it you know it's just like
what the hell man
don't you read the scientific glitter
don't you understand i mean i don't know
what to say i mean they publish this
stuff it's clear as uh and for anybody
they look at it i mean we did the
nuclear transfer experiments uh uh
identified that and it was clear that
you can't it cannot be a genetic disease
under any any way you can look at it
why would you just explain that for our
listeners
yeah well so uh what i did was i went
back in the scientific literature over
decades and looked at those experiments
where they were evaluating tumor cells
and whether um uh uh tumor cells could
direct normal development
and they were putting nucle the the
nucleus of a tumor cell into a new
cytoplasm
[Music]
and they were getting
um
no no dysregulated cell growth so you
have to realize that
people say what is cancer cancer is
dysregulated cell growth period that's
the phenotype of cancer dysregulated
cell growth
so is the dysregulated growth is the
origin of the disregulated growth does
it reside in the nucleus
with the genome the nuclear genome or in
the cytoplasm
with the mitochondria
so when you take the nucleus of the
tumor cell and put it into a new fresh
cytoplasm you get regulated cell growth
completely
uh different from what the mutation
theory would say on the other hand if i
if people who have done this
israel and schaefer had done this the
university of vermont they took the
nucleus of the normal cell and put it
into a cancer cytoplasm
and got dysregulated cell growth
just the opposite and then the more
recent experiments which are a little
bit more technically difficult is taking
normal mitochondria and placing them
into a cancer cytoplasm and causing
re-regulated growth
and then taking abnormal mitochondria
and putting it into a normal cell and
causing dysregulated cell growth so
clearly the origin of the disease
resides with the mitochondria in the
cytoplasm not with the nucleus not with
the genome in the nucleus
clear clear clear clear
so anyone who says that cancer is a
genetic disease obviously lacks
knowledge or is unfamiliar with the with
the situation
so
i mean it's i mean this is the way it is
i got it um
i i want to bring up a topic that
probably doesn't come up in a
conventional medical world but comes up
in the functional medicine integrative
medical world you mentioned a couple of
times about cancer creating an acidic
environment lactic acid things like that
so there are
and you know i don't don't subscribe to
the site here but there are those who
claim that eating an alkaline diet is
beneficial for fighting cancer can you
uh talk about why this does or does not
make sense well i think the body the
alkaline behavior of of the human body
is so tightly regulated i mean all of
our metabolic systems work in a very
narrow range of ph acidification
and if you try to alkeny alkanize the
body in an incredible way you're going
to create all kinds of of metabolic
instabilities
i'll give you an example we have
metastatic cancer the some of the best
models of metastatic cancer
that i work with and one of my students
tried to test this
they they said um
b and gillies i guess maybe gillies were
saying oh yeah alkanization will stop
cancer cells okay so we jacked up the um
uh alcohol
sodium uh
where is it uh bicarbonate bicarbonate
yeah
you know um we jacked up these didn't do
anything to the cancer um it didn't have
any any any redeemable effect so they're
saying oh yeah make it up you know where
the best way to make it alkaline take
away the goddamn glucose i mean they're
they're they're alkanine because they're
burning they're converting glucose into
lactic acid so again you pull the plug
on the glucose you don't get
acidification in the micro environment i
mean i mean everything is so simple if
you understand the biochemistry of what
you're dealing with why are you going to
jack up somebody make them alkaline your
body's not going to respond that way
about the physiology of your body has
evolved over millions of years to
maintain very accurate alkalinity so
that the enzymes that allow us to work
in metabolic homeostasis don't get
screwed up so people you know so what
was that people taking chloroquine and
all this other crazy stuff you know it's
just
when you understand the biology and the
biochemistry half but what people are
doing is nuts
you know it doesn't make sense we tried
it doesn't make sense
yeah actually i think i read somewheres
where you talked about using chloroquine
and um green tea extract yeah they both
inhibit glutamine right in some way well
here's the situation why we tried that
and still it's still
experimentally it works uh but it
doesn't it hasn't worked as well
yet in in cancer patients uh and and uh
and we're still we're still exploring
this listen to this
the metastatic cell is derived from a
macro batch this is one of our immune
cells in the body macrophage means big
eater okay so what the macrophages do
when they're restricted in energy they
begin to gobble up material from the
micro environment
digesting this material in the lysosome
and getting glucose and glutamine from
the fuel from the materials that they're
ingesting
okay so the stomach or the lysosome has
very low ph just like our stomach and
our body okay we have an acidic we our
stomachs are are acidic because we need
the acidity to break down and and and
metabolize foods that we eat well
proteins into amino acids yes yes and
and the complex sugars into into simple
sugars and and fats we break down all
this material so so
the lysosome will do much of the same
thing in a cell
now what was interesting is chloroquine
neutralizes acidity in the lysosome so
but we're not neutralizing the whole
body we're just neutralizing the the
stomach of the macrophage so if we
restrict effectively glucose and
glutamine and some of these cells are
still hanging on
it might be because they are able to
phagocytize that means eat uh junk from
the micro environment and therefore
potentially get small amounts of glucose
and glutamine from the material that
they phagocytized so the concept of
chloroquine was that it would neutralize
the acidity in the lysosome of the
cancer cell thereby blocking the ability
of the cell to get the two fuels that
they're needed to grow
so if we target
a target outside and use chloroquine
inside it could therap
provide a greater bang for your buck and
how does the green tea extract work well
the green tea extract
is thought to interrupt the
glutaminolysis pathway the the ability
of the uh of a cell to get energy from
glutamine if there's a pathway in that
glutam analysis there's two ways that uh
it goes from glutamine to glutamate to a
a tca cycle metabolite called alpha
ketoglutarate so this is all in the
krebs cycle the tca cycle so uh a green
tea
is a glutamate dehydrogenase inhibitor
so it there's two ways that glutamate
can get to alpha t to glutamate and that
is through a transamination i know this
might be very complicated for the
layperson a transamination reaction and
a dehydrogenase reaction and the green
tea blocks the dehydrogenase reaction
but we learn that most cancer cells are
getting to alpha-ketoglutarate through
the transamination reaction not through
the through that other so the green tea
may have a slight
uh effect again like metformin it's it's
like one of these very minor things
so any other nutritional supplements
that might play a role in that process
um well glutamine we haven't been able
to find anything yet uh on that process
because because glutamine is so
essential
um
that uh there doesn't seem to be and our
bodies can make it from actually glucose
uh there doesn't seem to be a
nutritional
um
uh way to target glutamine
at this point in time and that's the
reason why we use the drug deoxynor
leucine which is called don
that blocks the variability of of
glutamine to be metabolized it's a blue
it targets multiple different
glutaminases simultaneously thereby
blocking the ability of glutamines to
use the amide nitrogen as well as
as the carbon backbone for atp synthesis
energy synthesis so that seems to me
right now
at this point in time to be the singular
best way to shut down the glutaminolysis
pathway and that's why we pulsed on we
don't we don't give it as a chronic
because it can as you mentioned yes don
can disrupt a number of different
pathways and processes so we don't again
i i know that vegan uh proponents out
there are thinking ah
this is why you got to get rid of animal
protein out of the diet
no doug
pablo kelly the glioblastoma guy eats
only a carnivore diet so uh um and he's
managing his
tumor-wise quite well i'm not saying
that you know vegans can't manage their
tumor it all comes down to the to the
glucose ketone index which we published
so
cancer patients have to be in
therapeutic ketosis in order to have
these drugs work at their maximum
therapeutic effects
and you can get into therapeutic ketosis
if you're a vegan or you're a carnivore
doesn't make any difference you just
have to measure the ratio of glucose to
glutamine and know whether you're not
whether or not you're in therapeutic
ketosis so this is a broad range it's
very flexible for a cultural diet diet
differences because oh can i eat this
should i eat that candy this just
measure your glucose ketone index if
you're in therapeutic ketosis then you
don't have to worry about these other
issues it's interesting alpha
ketoglutarate is actually being touted
as an anti-aging
nutrient
i i don't know it doesn't get picked up
in the cells uh you got to have
transporters to get it into the cells
right the body will metabolize it see
the cells the cells all the cancer cells
all have you know massive transporters
for glucose and glutamine
uh you know this is the result of the
oncogenes so the oncogenes that
everybody likes to talk about are
facilitators so when respiration is
defective in order for the cell to
survive it has to ferment but you need
so much fermentable fuel and the
oncogenes turn on the receptors bringing
in large amounts of glucose and
glutamine as soon as you give the cell
back normal respiration the oncogenes
turn off you don't need all the
fermentable fuels so it's really quite
quite beautiful it's a quite beautiful
way
have you heard of jutorium
uh yeah we tried that um okay just just
for everybody to know um who's listening
there's a group of hungarian researchers
i've interviewed some of them in the
past who have this concept that
deuterium which is heavy hydrogen
slows down the production of energy into
mitochondria and plays a role in cancer
so
eating
a ketogenic diet actually is supposed to
reduce the amount of deuterium because
it has less there's less
water involved which are found in in
plants and and um
and and other foods um so um the the
claim is by following either a low
deuterium diet or i'm drinking low
deuterium water
is going to reduce cancer risk
well i don't know it might reduce cancer
risk that's it's possible but it's
certainly not going to kill cancer cells
so uh um you know we tried it does
because it slows down the ability of the
mitochondria this part of it that spins
the deuterium clogs it up yeah but it's
already clogged up the cancer cell's
already clogged up so you don't have to
worry about that you know
you just have to stop the glutamine from
coming deuterium is not going to stop
the glutamine from coming in providing
the atp for the cancer itself you know
uh i i know all that we tried a lot of
this stuff you know it's so simple man
you just got to target the glucose and
the glutamine while in therapeutic
ketosis trying to low deuterium water or
yeah we drank it ourselves we gave it to
the mice we you know it doesn't do it's
you know it might prevent i'm not saying
it can't prevent that's a different
issue preventing cancer is very
different than trying to manage cancer
okay so you keep your mitochondria
healthy your probability of getting
cancer is extremely low okay so
i want to hit one more topic i want to
hit oxidation now um
uh
there's a couple of ways that this plays
a raw i'm going to throw all three of
them out there that you do something
with it so one of them is that you
mentioned how the cancer cells create
these reactive oxygen species and that's
part of how the cancer
kills the healthy cells and stays alive
i know that you've talked about
in some of your writings using
hyperbaric oxygen to kill cancer cells
via oxidative stress
we know that chemo uses oxidative stress
and then i also want to throw out the
idea of
whether or not it's a good idea for
us
to recommend
antioxidant nutritional supplements as
part of uh
support for cancer patients yeah well
these are extremely important this is
extremely important point and you're
absolutely right
chemotherapy radiation therapy
works in large part by by creating a
reactive oxygen species in the micro
environment but the problem is of course
they're indiscriminate they they damage
normal cells
as well um why why we use uh hyperbaric
oxygen uh this was the work i did with
don diagostino
um at university of south florida who's
a real a real force and leader in
understanding uh the power of of uh
hyperbaric oxygen
uh taking antioxidants is probably not
going to have any effect in any really
meaningful way hyperbaric oxygen
actually
not only will saturate uh all the oxygen
positions in the hemoglobin molecule but
also dissolves oxygen directly because
of the pressure so you get oxygen
dissolved right right into the liquid
plasma of
of the body
and um
when the patient is in therapeutic
ketosis restricting the availability of
of glucose hyperbaric oxygen can
potentially
uh kill the cancer cells by a mechanism
similar to chemo and radiation without
causing uh the adverse toxicity that you
would see from these other
other
treatments you have to realize that that
glucose and glutamine
provide
antioxidant defense for the cancer cells
through the work on glutathione they
both converge on glutathione so if i
pull the plug on glucose and glutamine
the cancer cell now becomes more
vulnerable to death from reactive oxygen
species which could be forced into a
greater state by hyperbaric oxygen
interestingly enough if the normal cells
are burning ketone bodies they're very
resistant to the to formation of
reactive oxygen species based on the
work of the late richard veach who did
all the bioenergetics to prove that so
when you take a cancer patient put them
into therapeutic ketosis
and then put them in a hyperbaric oxygen
chamber you're essentially killing the
cancer cells in a mechanism similar to
that of radiation chemo without the
adverse effects
have you considered adding in
intravenous vitamin c which vitamin c at
a very high dosage like that is a pro
oxidant and yes
yeah i i've seen some success with iv
vitamin c but as long as the pa is if
the cancer patient is in therapeutic
ketosis
and glutamine targeting with iv vitamin
c you could also work this there's a lot
of ways to skin this cancer cat
and all of these things used
appropriately under the right dosage
timing and scheduling
could be very very therapeutic
it's just that very few people are
exploring this whole this whole field uh
mainly because they're searching for
gene mutations that are largely
irrelevant
right
yeah it's part of your theory if
everybody didn't pick up on this that
these gene mutations
result from the damage to the
mitochondria not the other way around
yes yes and some gene mutations we know
for the idh1 mutation
is highly therapeutic it's a it's a
acquired mutation that indirectly
targets the glycolysis and
glutamineolysis pathways simultaneously
so it's really incredible so their their
way is that
it's both the glycolysis pathway and the
glutamineolysis pathway
so uh this idh1 mutation allows cancer
pain brain cancer patients especially to
live twice as long
so um they live twice as long
because the mutation uh takes and takes
alpha ketoglutarate and metabolizes it
to this what they call an onco
metabolite called two hydroxy glutamate
two hydroxy glutarate
stabilizes
the oncogene called hif1 alpha allow a
la uh uh uh preventing glucose from
coming into the cell so the the very
waste pro the very diverted pro
a product of this mutation shuts down
the glycolytic pathway also if you re if
you you know you know the tca cycle that
alpha ketoglutarate is the fuel for
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation energy and that's
diverted off to so it's so diverted off
to two hydroxyl glutamate so this
mutation
in indirectly targets
both of the two pathways absolutely
essential for the rapid growth of the
tumor and the people who acquire it by
chancel i call it a gift from god
they get it they get it by chance alone
they live a lot longer now here's the
crazy thing
there are drug companies out there
trying to target and stop
the 2-hydroxy glutamate from
from being produced which is insane man
so this this shows you how the lack of
knowledge in the cancer field is just
profound that you would take away what
god gave you so you can make a buck on
the drug that would stop it it makes no
sense so um you know so i i look at this
and and i say and then you irradiate the
brain of somebody with the glioblastoma
freeing up massive amounts of glucose
and glutamine from the very treatment
that you're trying to protect the
patient you're creating a micro
environment so if but even though with
that the patient will still live a
little longer with this idh1 mutation
but the guy we have in england published
this big paper now it's in just came out
one month ago and has over 14 000 views
you know it's it shows that the acquired
mutation together with his metabolic
diet he's allowed seven seven years now
the guy is out seven years this is
unheard of but it's because because of
the understanding of the metabolic
origin of cancer
yeah it seems to me the biggest obstacle
right now to
people in the integrative functional
medicine world who are say
giving some advice to cancer patients
uh
employing a ketogenic diet by the way
are there specific parameters about the
type of ketogenic diet you recommend
but i was going to say the biggest uh
issue for them is going to be being able
to block glutamine without using this
prescription drug
yeah well that's one of the
tragedies one of the great tragedies we
have today and there is no specific
ketogenic diet any food item that you
eat that brings you into therapeutic
ketosis based on the glucose ketone
index monitor will be effective whether
it's a vegan preparation or a carnivore
preparation or whatever as long as as
long as you get into you can take
whatever as long as you can get your gki
value down now here's the absurdity do
you recommend incorporating some fasting
or intermittent fasting with the
ketogenic yes
or like a protocol that you would
sort of recommend
yeah we have we have that uh it's
actually uh some of it's
in the paper that we just published in
nutrition in frontiers in nutrition with
with the glioblastoma patient he has
what he did in there to keep the to keep
the thing but you know we're not allo
the fda now don deoxy nor leucine was
used years ago for little kids with with
leukemias and it worked pretty well and
it was but they never come they never
used it they they pressed it like you
said it's not good to do that and they
they used it consistently without
without targeting glucose at the same
time so they got more marginal effects
but right now um physicians fear using
it because they might lose their license
because it's not it's not approved right
well they just approved an alzheimer's
drug with the scientists that is not
going to work
through through uh political
manipulations between the drug the drug
company and the food and drug
administration and for interestingly uh
you know dr dale bredesen just published
a paper on 25 patients uh showing 80
reversal of their alzheimer's using a
ketogenic diet and other nutritional
supports oh yeah veach did a big
feech was the leader on that and showed
that you know
uh uh alzheimer's patients are
hypoglycemic they you can't and they
also have a resistance to cancer you
can't grow cancer if you go if you're
hypoglycemic they can't get the the
glucose through the cells but the
ketones can bypass that it's an end
around a back alley way to get in
through the and bypass all that stuff
but but but the issue is is that we have
a drug called don used with the
metabolic therapy will be absolutely
effective in managing the vast majority
of human cancers
and why
is the why are we prevented from using
that drug when we're using these uh
alzheimer's drugs that will generate
large amounts of revenue
for the pharmaceutical company we're
gone
swelling and bleeding in the brains of
30 of the patients who take it yes
oh it's just you know give me a break
so uh um you know and i know johns
hopkins is producing a dawn analog uh
where they can take it orally rather
than infuse it with a port because
stomach acid will will disrupt on so if
you put it in the bloodstream you're
going to get real power but but you
can't eat it you can't take it as a pill
because your stomach acid will destroy
most of it so johns hopkins is trying to
build the dawn drug that maybe could
last by through pill you know it'll be
work but it will work better when you
put it with keep therapeutic ketosis so
people are working on these things it's
not like we're not working on them but
we know what we need to do to manage
cancer
excellent thank you so much dr c freed
any final thoughts you want to leave to
our listeners
well i think it's going to be the the
change will come from the power of the
people
and once people who have cancer realize
what they can do to manage their disease
the sad part is is that this field is
not ready for this the physicians who
you need as a as to help are not trained
and they don't understand the concepts
and that's where we we need to have a a
real paradigm change so that we can make
cancer a very manageable and not so
stressful disease which i absolutely
know can happen
and and if people want to know more
about your work how can they find out
about it
well we publish most of our papers on uh
peer-reviewed open access we just look
at my name
and just say cancer and you'll see large
numbers of youtube videos and things
like this and we get much of our
financial support
from the foundation for metabolic cancer
therapies from travis
uh we get we get support from the good
people who know what we're saying and
want to help us
um because it's very hard to get
research grants uh from the nih
uh when you're
on the same kind of
stuff so we're moving forward and we'll
definitely have this
uh manageable hopefully in the not too
distant future so we can reduce the 1600
uh people a day dying to uh half
and i'm sure we can do absolutely sure
we can cut that number down in half in a
in a very short period of time if we are
allowed to do what we need to do
that would be awesome dr siegfried
thank you thank you thank you very much
for having me thank you listeners for
making it all the way through this
episode of the rational wellness podcast
please take a few minutes and go to
apple podcast and give us a five-star
ratings and review that would really
help us
so more people can find us in their
listing of
health podcasts i'd also like to let
everybody know that i now have a few
openings for new clients for nutritional
consultations
if you're interested please call my
office in santa monica at 310-395-3111
that's 310-395-311
and
take one of the
few openings we have now for a
individual
consultation for nutrition with dr ben
weitz thank you and see you next week